
Possibilities and barriers
Safety - as is reported in a recent fact sheet by the World Health Organization [WHO
2015], the number of people killed by accidents involving cars every year amounts to
about 1.25 million, half of which consisting of pedestrians and cyclists. This number
is expected to grow in future years, in the absence of corrective measures.
In general, 90% of car accidents are caused by human mistakes [NHTSA 2008]. In
addition to that, NHTSA14 and CDC [CDC 2015] report that, in 2014, about the
30% of casualties on the road were caused by alcohol-conditioned driving (and 16%
by drivers under the effect of other drugs). It is clear that those situations may be
nearly completely avoided with the diffusion of autonomous vehicles: [Bimbraw 2015]
forecasts that new technologies may prevent 5 million deaths between now and 2020.
A total crash elimination would also result in different, lightweight designs for the
car cabins, since today’s cars security measures and very robust bodies would be no
longer needed. Smaller investments would also need to be placed in the deployment
of road signage and traffic police.
— Traffic optimization - the technologies under discussion would sensibly enhance the
traffic situation, by reducing congestions and optimizing the traffic flow through a
continuous communication between vehicles. This advantage is of course related to
the previous one -given that it is estimated that 25% of traffic jams are caused by
incidents [FHWA 2005]- but the traffic situation on the roads can also benefit of
other reasons, such as the enlargement of safety distance, or the reduced time spent
by drivers searching for parking spots (since the car itself could implement automatic
and optimized search mechanisms).
— Improved energy efficiency - the reduction of congestions and delays would also result
in a significant reduction of emissions and energy consumption. Self-driving vehicles
would also consume fuel in a more efficient way than human driven vehicles.
— New vehicle ownership paradigms and business models - today, personal cars stay
parked and unused for most of the time. Autonomous vehicles would make car sharing easier and more effective, with fleets of driverless vehicles capable of picking
travellers, leaving them where they need to go and then serve other persons (the
so-called self-driving taxies forecasted in [Sightline 2013]).
Young, elderly and impaired people, or people currently unable to drive for any reason, would be given the possibility of being on the road. Moreover, with no need of
accompanying those people, the amount of cars on the road would be reduced.
New insurance models would be needed for cars that are uncapable of crashing and
breaking the traffic rules [KPMG 2015].

Costs - as reported by [The Wall Street Journal 2013], just the installation of LIDAR
systems actually costs from $30,000 to $85,000, resulting in a price for the whole car
that is obviously unaffordable for the average automobile user. Without drastic drops,
price will be a serious obstacle for the penetration of the technology in the market.
— Technology and Standards - there is still need for solid research for all autonomous
vehicle techologies to be deployed on mass-marketed cars and not just on prototypes.
For instance, V2V communication technologies, which are fundamental for overcoming the remaining issues of sensor-based autonomous cars, are still far from being
extensively deployed.
Standards should be developed to regulate verification and validation, to ensure reliability, and to protect the privacy of the data collected and exchanged (this issue has
been discussed in section 5).
— Coexistence with non-autonomous vehicles - in February, 2016 a Google Car caused
the first reported car crash caused by a self-driving vehicle [The Verge 2016b]. The
accident was caused by a car making contact with a passenger bus after having predicted -wrongly- that it was stopping. As acknowledged by Google itself in his montly
report, “this is a classic example of the negotiation that’s a normal part of driving -
we’re all trying to predict each other’s movements” [McKinsey Insights 2016]. Until
vehicles driven by humans will still be on the streets, there will always be risks associated to missing negotiation (often made, by motorists, with simple glances) and
incorrect predictions.
— Skepticism - customers may not want to replace their traditional cars with selfdriving vehicles: they may find them dangerous or useless, or may not want to give
up the activity of driving, which is found as pleasing or funny by most drivers. OEMs
should therefore try to build interest and trust about their products, and to involve
the demographics that might be more intrigued by revolutionary technologies.
— Unemployment - not only drivers would lose their jobs, but also truckers, insurers,
traffic wardens and all the professionals working in sectors related to traditional
driving.
— Liability - lawmakers should define clear rules about who is accountable in case of
accidents involving autonomous vehicles. Several automakers -Google, Mercedes and
Volvo to name some- have assured that they will accept complete liability in such
cases [IEEE Spectrum 2015].

CHALLENGES FOR SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Security
Usability and Safety


